[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Where do we come from?
What are we?
Where are we going?
Almost hidden in the
top left-hand corner
of this painting, the
artist Paul Gauguin
has written in French
these three questions.
Where do we come from?
What are we?
Where are we going?
Like many other
people, I have puzzled
over the nature of human
existence for a long time,
and my work as a
documentary filmmaker
has given me opportunities to
consider these great mysteries
from many different angles.
And I've found
increasingly that some
of the most helpful and
challenging contributions
to my quest have
come from the work
of the Austrian philosopher and
educationalist Rudolf Steiner.
This film is about Steiner's
life, and about the work
that his ideas and
insights have inspired
in all areas of human life--
ideas that challenge us to
ponder on the true nature
of the human being.
In Gauguin's words, what are we?
Steiner would probably add,
and what might we become?
>> Rudolf Steiner challenges
us to be more conscious.
More conscious
and also, I think,
to ground our consciousness
in the wants of heart.
And I feel one of the most
important things about Steiner
is actually that
he encourages us
to bring thinking
and feeling together,
so head and heart together.
>> For me, meeting the work of
Rudolf Steiner was like finding
water in the desert.
Because I had
searched and searched
through many different spiritual
paths, very much in the East,
and also in the West,
including the spiritual path
of modern science.
I can't think of anybody
else who simultaneously
follows the whole philosophical
and scientific tradition
within the West and within
modernity, studies it
carefully, becomes
very competent
in its different disciplines,
and at the same time is clearly
a mystic.
>> I think the challenge for me
is to individualize what he has
given.
As he was in Norway, he almost
always in his talks said,
don't believe what I'm saying.
You have to try it in life.
Try it in life.
And for me, that's
my inner direction.
I have to try it out,
and not just take it
for granted it is like this.
And then life
becomes so exciting.
>> I think really
Steiner is about love.
But it's hard to get
to that realization,
because of so many thoughts.
There are so many thoughts.
But when I think of
him, I don't always
think of the thoughts,
though I'm impressed by them,
of course.
I think much more of
this man traveling
on drafty trains in
the middle of the night
to go to the next city to meet
with nine people who are trying
to figure something out.
Or people just claw--
scratching at him
constantly for help.
So he was a servant.
He wasn't a privileged person.
He was a servant.
So I think it's
about love really.
>> Rudolf Steiner's influence,
particularly through his
indications about education,
agriculture and medicine,
is increasingly apparent.
There are seven Rudolf
Steiner Waldorf Schools
in India, and over 1,000
worldwide, plus communities
for those with
learning difficulties,
as well as hundreds
of farmers working
with his suggestions of how
to not only produce healthier
food, but also how to heal
the Earth in the process.
Waldorf Schools,
biodynamic agriculture,
Weleda, Demeter,
Hauschka, Camphill--
these names are increasingly
familiar all over the world.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> In South India, I visited
a group of small scale farmers
learning about the influence
not just of the sun and the moon
on plant growth and health,
but also of the planets,
a reminder of what in many
parts of the world is still not
totally forgotten.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Rudolf Steiner
shared this knowledge,
in part based on
traditional wisdom,
in a course of lectures to
farmers in Central Europe
in 1924, a year before he died.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> An awareness of the
influence of the planetary
constellations, and
including when you sow what,
is also central to
biodynamic agriculture,
a worldwide movement informed
and inspired by that course
of lectures delivered at a time
when the farmers were already
expressing concern about
the effect that chemical
fertilizers were having on
the soil and on the health
and quality of their produce.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The beauty of Dr. Rudolf
Steiner is that he was not just
a philosopher living
in a world of ideas,
and just philosophizing
and just thinking.
He brought all these ideas
to practical human activity,
whether it's agriculture,
education, medicine,
architecture.
>> Rudolf Steiner himself
grew up beside railway lines.
His father was a station master,
and the exciting new world
of trains was ever-present.
Steiner was two years old
when, in 1863, his father
was transferred to this station
at Pottschach in lower Austria.
He lived here
until he was eight.
Steiner wrote in
his autobiography
of his deep appreciation
for the unspoiled landscape
in which he grew up.
Despite the new technology
on his doorstep,
life for the young boy
was essentially simple--
simple, but far from cozy.
Here, Steiner lived not
only in the two worlds
of trains and nature,
both of which he loved,
but also in an inner world
of spiritual experiences
that were as real to him as
the physical world around him.
Already around the
age of seven, he
had a vivid experience
of a relative
who had just committed suicide
and who asked him for help.
But it was to be almost 40 years
before he could speak openly
about such matters.
What is the true
nature of reality?
Where do we come from?
What are we?
Where are we going?
These are questions that
were to occupy Rudolf Steiner
for the rest of his life.
In 1868, the family
moved nearer to Vienna
to the village of Neudorf.
By now, Steiner had a
younger brother and sister.
Though less remote
than Pottschach,
his home was still, in Steiner's
words, austere but healthy.
He served as an altar boy at the
local Catholic church, helped
grow vegetables for the family.
But the essence of his journey
through childhood and youth--
that long walk to school--
was the story of a very
bright but essentially lonely
child, nudged by his father to
study science and technology
to qualify as an
engineer on the railways,
who was nevertheless thinking
deeply about what he called
the enigmas of existence.
And already, at the age of 14,
studying the German philosopher
Immanuel Kant.
In 1879, at the age of
18, he passed his school
leaving examination
with distinction.
For three years, he'd
given private tuition
to fellow pupils
in order, he wrote,
to contribute at
least a little of what
my parents had to pay out
of their meager income
for my schooling.
And having attended a technical
rather than a grammar school,
he had had to teach
himself Latin and Greek.
From the Austrian countryside
in which Steiner had grown up
as the son of a humble railway
official, the move to Vienna
was a huge step.
Capital of the vast
Habsburg Empire,
it was a cosmopolitan city
buzzing with life, creativity,
and philosophical debate,
a cultural flowering
on a massive scale.
In the autumn of that
same year, Steiner
enrolled at the
Technical University
to study biology, chemistry,
physics, and mathematics.
But already his interests were
as much in German philosophy
and literature as in science.
Very soon, his social
life began to flourish.
The famous Cafe Griensteidl,
which for a time
he gave as his
address, is now more
a tourist attraction than a
hive of philosophical debate.
But round the corner at
this nearby coffee house,
it is easier to imagine
the atmosphere of that era,
and the extraordinary
variety of people
with whom the young
Steiner was mixing--
poets, rich merchants,
Cistercian monks, feminists,
university professors, and
poor students like himself.
I asked two young
customers, both of whom
knew something about
Steiner's life and legacy,
whether the sort of discussions
that Steiner and others had
in coffeehouses like this
one were a thing of the past.
>> Those dialogues, really
to sit hours and hours,
and to develop an idea, I think
you can't find that in that way
anymore.
>> Do you think that's sad?
>> In a way, yes, because
I'm old fashioned.
But I'm quite open to
new ways of dialogues.
And I think especially the
communication through the net
is an enormous,
enormous chance, yeah?
>> Opportunity.
Yeah.
So you're optimistic about the
future in that sense, are you?
>> I'm very optimistic, yeah.
And to me, that idea,
it's always a question,
how would Steiner
act in those days?
Would he use the
internet or not?
I think he would.
>> Yes, definitely.
>> He would e very, very open
to our ways and our chances
and our opportunities to
communicate, to develop,
to work together.
>> Not everyone interested in
Steiner's work would agree with
Pippa about Steiner and the
internet, not only because he,
like many others, recognized
that technological advances
ever since the printing
press were no replacement
for face-to-face
human encounters,
but also that the mindset
behind such devices could,
if we remain unconscious, takes
us on a slippery slope in which
our entire world gradually
becomes dehumanized.
What Steiner made
clear, however,
is that all such
decisions have finally
to rest with the individual.
>> His main message,
especially to me,
was or is that he wants us to
stand up for our own ideas.
And that's, especially in
our time, not that easy.
So for people, it's much more
easy to put him into a box
than to focus his message
and follow the message.
And I think he didn't
want us to follow him,
he wanted us to
follow ourselves.
>> Although Steiner had an
increasingly wide circle
of friends, he was at the same
time following his own inner
voice.
But, like all of us, he
needed his awakeners--
people who actually
change your life.
On his regular train journey
from home into Vienna,
he met such a person,
a man with whom
he could at last share his inner
life of spiritual experiences.
Felix Koguski was a herbalist
who traveled into Vienna
to sell to apothecaries the
medicinal herbs he had gathered
in the countryside.
On his back, wrote Steiner
in his autobiography,
were his bundles of herbs.
But in his heart
was the knowledge
of the spiritual
aspects of nature
that had come to him
through gathering them.
Through Felix, Steiner
learned that there
existed a vast store
of traditional wisdom
that was soon to disappear
completely from the folk
culture of central Europe.
In his company,
Steiner felt in touch
with what he called a soul
from ancient times, someone
with the intuitive knowledge
that he himself had experienced
since childhood, and
which he was already
trying to understand,
and above all to anchor,
in the world of modern
day consciousness.
But there was another
ingredient that Steiner
was to increasingly emphasize.
For every step that we take
in our search for this deeper
wisdom, we need to take three
steps in our moral development.
A person should not
be on this journey,
he wrote some 25 years
later, to accumulate
learning as one's own
treasure of knowledge,
but in order to
place this learning
in the service of the world.
Meanwhile, the young
Steiner was to experience
another great awakener--
a man who was also to
profoundly influence
the course of his life.
Among the great personalities
of the German-speaking world,
both past and present, he
became inspired by the work
of the literary giant Johann
Wolfgang von Goethe, who
had died some 50 years earlier.
Not Goethe just as a poet
and novelist, but Goethe
as scientist, particularly
his work in anatomy,
optics, and botany.
Later, Steiner was to call him
the Copernicus and the Kepler
of the organic world.
>> Goethe was a huge
influence on Steiner.
And Steiner felt that he
discovered a kindred spirit
in Goethe, because he was
approaching the natural world
with an open heart,
and not as an object
to be studied and
measured and quantified,
but rather as a
world that was still
imbued with something sacred.
I think Goethe was very aware
of the sacredness of nature,
and that's why he wanted to
approach it in a different way,
with empathy rather than with
objectifying consciousness.
>> But he still thought
of himself as a scientist,
didn't he--
Goethe?
>> He certainly did, because
he was interested in knowledge,
and a type of knowledge
that was a direct knowing,
really a perceiving, to actually
see into the spiritual workings
of nature.
So he was focused much more
on the world of qualities
than of quantities,
and much more
on what could be
perceived by each person
as a human being unaided by
any scientific instruments.
So for him,
scientific instruments
tended to get in the
way of really seeing
what was living in nature.
That's why he's so much at odds
with the approach of mainstream
science.
>> Jeremy Naydler is a writer
with a doctorate in theology
and religious studies who
makes his living as a gardener
in Oxford.
For Goethe, the human being
is the most exact instrument.
If you can develop
that instrument
into an organ of deep
perception, then of course
you'll see more
and more in nature.
And that's what
Steiner was able to do.
He developed himself as
a spiritual instrument,
I suppose.
So he was perceiving much
more than most people are
able to perceive in
the natural world.
And he extended that to
invisible worlds, of course.
>> And was pointing to the fact
that we all have this potential
then.
>> Absolutely.
It's not so easy to
develop it, though.
But one just has to keep working
at it, really on a daily basis.
>> What is your understanding
of the key to working with it
then?
>> Well, when I go
into the gardens,
I'm very aware that the
first thing I want to do is,
I see weeds, and I see all
sorts of things that need doing.
So I want to get engaged
with practical stuff.
But I try to stop
myself, and just
spend at least a few
minutes with a plant,
and just observe
it, just be with it.
And there's something
immensely centering
and healing in doing that.
And I feel it actually helps the
rest of my day in the garden.
You realize that there's
a miracle there really.
And it's so easy to not see it.
>> But that would be true
perhaps in life all together.
We just simply don't
notice things, do we?
We take things for granted.
>> Yeah.
>> Not just plants.
>> That's absolutely true
of life all together.
>> Goethe does provide
a kind of transition,
a foundation for transition
between conventional day
consciousness and what Steiner
calls ultimately his spiritual
science.
That is to say, a way of
engaging the world of spirit,
the world of our own
inner experiences,
with as much surety and clarity
as we do the outer world.
I'm going to remind you of
what we saw the very beginning
of our class.
Remember, there was a little
Wimshurst machine here
that allows us to do
something very similar.
Slightly different
geometry, but basically--
>> Arthur Zajonc is an
American professor of physics
at the University of
Massachusetts Amherst.
Alongside his
interest in Steiner,
and through his connection with
the work of the Dalai Lama,
he is a pioneer in bringing
the practice of meditation
into academic circles.
I asked Arthur to explain
the young Steiner's interest
in the philosopher
Emmanuel Kant,
and in particular Steiner's
rejection of Kant's hugely
influential utterances on
the limits to knowledge.
>> The limits, the so-called
limits to knowledge,
are really the
limits of a horizon.
You know, if you stand
on a mountaintop,
you see further than if
you're down in the valley.
Well, but you've got to get
to the mountaintop, right?
So yes, you could say there
are limits to knowledge
if you're in a
particular location,
but there's nothing to keep
you from developing yourself
to a higher extent.
It's like climbing the
mountain and seeing further.
They'll still be a horizon.
So you'll still
experience a limit.
But the limit is a
subjective limit,
and not an objective statement
about the way the world
is organized.
So yes, you could say
Steiner recognized
that there are in the moment
certain limits to knowledge,
but that these are not
part of our human nature.
Human nature is, in some
ways, inexhaustible.
Everything that can be known
can be known by the human being.
We are in that sense
in the image of God,
we are filled with the
potential for the most
profound and extraordinary
way of knowing.
>> I looked at it more carefully
and then saw in its leaves it
does something incredible--
that the lower leaves are long
stocked and kidney-shaped,
and they form a little rosette.
There are only three
of them still alive.
There were more earlier on.
Then a little ways
up the main stem
you have the next leaf,
which also has a long stock,
but is already in its blade.
>> Craig Holdrege has also had
a long interest in Steiner,
and through Steiner
into the work of Goethe.
In upstate New York, he has
founded the Nature Institute,
where observation, the kind
of meditative observation
that Steiner practiced over
many years, is explored.
>> We founded the Nature
Institute with the intention
of having a place that can
cultivate a particular way
of knowing that can bring us
back more in relationship with
nature in the things themselves.
And that sounds very harmless
and simple and maybe not
even that important,
but if you think
about how strongly our
culture and our minds
are captivated with
certain abstract ideas,
and we notice that
people come to us
with many, many
abstractions in their minds
about what hormones do,
about what the brain does,
about how natural selection has
made us this way or that way,
and we have all these
explanations of the world.
But do we see the world?
Do we experience
the world anymore?
And of course with our
technologically dominated
culture this becomes
more and more an issue.
Goethe said
something like, if we
want to gain a living
understanding of nature,
we must make ourselves as mobile
and flexible as nature herself.
So science as transformation
of the human being
to understand the living
character of the world--
that's the mission of
the Nature Institute.
When Steiner came
across Goethe's work
when he was still a student at
the university in Vienna, what
he found in Goethe, what
stimulated him in Goethe,
was that here was a man
who really immersed himself
in the phenomenal world, didn't
have lots of abstract concepts,
and thereby opened himself to
seeing relationships that spoke
of more than the mere physical.
It is just unfortunate
today that we are so so
much in a dualistic culture--
matter and mind,
body and spirit--
if we even think about
the one half, right?
But if we do think about
the spiritual, or the soul,
or whatever, then it's always
in contrast to the body.
But to see a unified
world, and that was really
Steiner in his epistemology
based on Goethe
was all about the one
world that we live in.
It is one world, and we
are part of one world,
and there aren't
two or three or 50.
There might be nuances
and different levels
or whatever you
want to call them,
different aspects that
one can gain access to,
but it is one manifoldly
differentiated world.
In this approach to
understanding the world,
you really do have to slow down.
So I sometimes thought about
this methodology or this aspect
of the methodology,
that it would
be interesting to speak
like one speaks of slow food
today and slow money, to
speak of slow science.
We need to slow down so that we
can really dwell in the things
as the basis of a deeper
understanding of the world.
>> Towards each
other, too, then.
>> Yes.
I mean, in all respects.
I speak mainly about, when
I'm speaking about nature,
I'm also speaking about
my fellow human beings
in all our relationships,
this taking the time.
>> One set of relationships
that Steiner had while still
studying in Vienna, and which
was to have far-reaching
consequences, took
place in this building,
the home of the Specht family.
Steiner tutored the four
boys during his last six
years in Vienna,
while at the same time
studying and writing on Goethe.
Of particular concern
to his parents
was Otto, 10 years old
when Steiner first met
him, and considered by everyone
as both physically and mentally
abnormal, and
therefore uneducable.
With Steiner's help, Otto's
condition gradually improved,
and eventually he
became a doctor.
There is now a whole movement
for therapeutic education
in schools and
villages, not only
here on the banks of the
Severn Estuary in England,
but all over the world--
a movement inspired by
the lectures Steiner
gave in 1924, drawing
on his experience
with Otto, as well as
on his own insights
into the makeup
of the human being
and the abnormalities
that can occur.
Rudolf Steiner's
own next challenge
was the editing of
Goethe's scientific papers,
as well as writing his key
book, "The Philosophy of freedom
In 1891, at the
age of 30, he was
awarded a doctorate
of philosophy
from the University of Rostock.
A year earlier, he'd
moved to Weimar.
It was to be a lonely
seven years working
within the formality of the
Goethe-Schiller archives,
and with no one
with whom he could
discuss his increasingly
rich inner life
of spiritual experiences.
Meanwhile, his philosophical
writings and insights
remained largely unrecognized.
>> I discovered Steiner
when I was in my early 20s,
and I was at Oxford
at the university,
in a highly intellectualized
environment, which I hated.
>> Studying?
>> Studying philosophy, or
PPE, which includes philosophy.
Philosophy was the thing that I
was really interested and keen
on.
And it was just agony for me.
I hated it.
It was Bertrand
Russell and David Hume
and every manner of reductionist
thinker that you could imagine.
And there was no
real philosophy.
And then I came
across Steiner's work,
and it was a godsend to me,
because there was someone
talking about thinking, but
in a completely different way
from the abstract,
intellectualized thinking
that's practiced in
the universities.
>> Can you describe
what that view is then?
What's this alternative?
>> Well, one of Steiner's
key works is "The Philosophy
of Spiritual Activity" or
"Philosophy of Freedom."
It has those two
different titles.
And in that book, he describes
how thinking as an activity
can be intensified, so that
becomes a kind of dialogue
with the world of spirit.
And that seemed to me to be
a path that I could follow.
>> But when you say
world of spirit,
that can sound pretty
weird to some people.
Are you talking about
talking to spiritual beings,
or what do you mean by
the world of spirit?
>> Well, yes, I do.
It may well sound weird, but I
think that's the reality of it.
Yes.
But of course, one's actually
in a kind of inner dialogue
with a world of thoughts.
But the question is, what is
the source of our thinking?
Where do our thoughts come from?
That's a living
question, which I
think anyone who's engaged with
that question of what thinking
really is is obliged to ask.
>> And most people would
probably say that our thoughts
come from our brain.
>> Most people probably
would say that.
Yes.
Well, I don't think
that's actually correct.
And even to the
extent, of course,
thinking is dependent
on our having a brain.
So if you cut my head off,
I wouldn't be able to think.
But it doesn't mean that the
source of thinking is material.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> How long must I be silent,
was the question that Rudolf
Steiner was asking himself
as he reached the age of 40.
Unable still to share his
experiences of what he called
[GERMAN], the spiritual world.
In 1897, he moved
to Berlin, initially
to edit an avant garde literary
and theatrical magazine.
But it wasn't only to
intellectuals and artists
that he was drawn.
As a result, he was asked
to give courses in history
at a worker's
educational institute,
a post he held for seven years.
But among the citizens of
Berlin, as elsewhere in Europe
and beyond, were an
increasing number
of people interested
in spiritual teachings.
In the case of the
theosophists, in a wisdom
with its roots in the East.
Here at last was an audience
eager to listen to someone
not just speaking
out of the past,
but out of his own inner vision.
But what was becoming the
most powerful experience
of all finally brought
about the break with many
of these early followers.
For the theosophists,
Jesus Christ
was just one of many great
teachers throughout history.
For Steiner,
Christ's incarnation
as a deed of huge
cosmic significance
became a powerful and
transformative experience.
>> It's not a sectarian
understanding of Christ.
So I think he not wanting
to associate Christ
too closely with the
Christian church.
I mean, I think the
Christian church, sadly,
is all too sectarian sometimes.
For Steiner, it's a strong
view of how humanity as a whole
is transformed by Christ.
>> Fraser Watts is a priest
in the Church of England,
and someone with a long interest
in the work of Rudolf Steiner.
He is also a fellow of
Queen's College Cambridge,
and reader in
theology and science.
>> There's been quite a big
tendency in the 20th century
to do a retreat to some kind
of subjective or existential
understanding of Christianity.
But Steiner is absolutely going
in the opposite direction.
For him, it is just
an objective fact
that the evolution of
human consciousness
was changed by Christ.
I mean, take it or leave it.
Even if no one had
known about that,
even if there had never been
any one of Christian faith,
for Steiner, I think
that transformation
of human consciousness
would still
have happened as a result
of the work of Christ.
>> The church at Pottschach, in
the village where Steiner lived
until he was eight years old.
As a child and
throughout his life,
he was drawn to a great variety
of people, priests included.
In his autobiography,
he describes his father
as a free thinker.
For Steiner himself, what
increasingly mattered
was knowledge, but
the kind of knowledge
in which science and
religion, faith and reason,
are not at odds.
A scientist of the invisible
is how he has sometimes
been described.
>> I think the distinctive
thing about Steiner's approach
to that is to want to find
some scientific approach
to religious and
spiritual questions.
There are different ways of
bringing science and religion
into dialogue, but I
think that's what's
distinctive-- to
approach, I think
he would say the spiritual
rather than the religious,
but to approach the spiritual
in a scientific way.
He clearly has
exceptional powers.
Because they're so unusual,
it's hard to know quite
how to characterize those.
But he's clearly some
kind of clairvoyant.
And he's unusually
disciplined and highly
trained in the way he uses
those clairvoyant powers.
And he has such a
serious sense of purpose
to leave the world a
better place as a result
of his mission, and
arising out of that,
all this great outpouring
of practical activity.
And I don't know of
anyone else who spans
all those things, really--
has the exceptional powers,
is so disciplined with them,
so purposeful, and so practical.
I think that's a
unique contribution.
>> Why is Steiner not
better known, do you think?
>> It's an interesting question
why Steiner isn't better known.
I think there are
various reasons.
There's something off-putting
about his writings.
I think that that
has to be said.
>> What, his style, you mean?
>> Yes.
Yes.
Style and content, I think,
and also something off-putting
about the society, the kind of
following that he has sometimes
built up around him, which can
look rather to cult-like from
the outside--
not at all what he
wanted, I think,
but it can look like that.
>> The network of people
interested in Steiner's ideas
is worldwide and growing.
Here in Hyderabad in South
India, several hundred
are gathering for a conference
of the Asia-Pacific region
of the Anthroposophical
Society, anthroposophy
being the name Steiner
chose for his movement
after his break with
the theosophists.
Most if not all of
these people would
reject the notion of a cult,
in that as teachers, farmers,
doctors, and therapists,
although interested and
inspired by Steiner's
insights, they are working hard
to make these insights their
own and to take them further,
as well as to learn from
important developments
in education, science, medicine,
and psychology since Steiner's
death nearly 100 years ago.
>> I'm originally from the UK.
I met anthroposophy
33, 34 years ago
in a school for handicapped
children near Reading.
It's now a Waldorf School.
At that time it was a
special school, some severely
disadvantaged children there.
And I worked as the gardener,
and my wife worked as the cook.
And for me, meeting the
work of Rudolf Steiner
was like finding
water in the desert.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Most of my teaching in
Waldorf education has been
in Australia.
And in the last few
years of still teaching
in Australia in the
'90s, I already started
to come to Asia
during my holidays,
and made contact with various
very grassroots initiatives
beginning the Waldorf Schools.
And little by little
this grew, and now I
work full-time really.
I'm particularly now
in China and Taiwan.
>> What is the response
then to Steiner in that part
of the world?
>> It's exploding.
It's phenomenal
what is happening
in China at the moment.
I would say the people who
come to the training courses
and seminars and
the initiatives that
have started in China, those
people I would say are hungry.
They're really hungry to
find meaning in their lives.
They are hungry to connect
with the outside world.
And they're deeply grateful.
That is my experience.
And this is what
gives me energy.
>> The mainstream education
in China is very, very tough,
very, very competitive, and
you know that the children,
they are forced to
study from very young,
from kindergarten back
to three years old.
And more and more
parents realize
this is not what they want.
Actually, like the Waldorf
Schools and kindergartens,
most of the initiatives
are parents.
>> In India, as
elsewhere in the world,
what increasingly concerns
many parents in particular is
the stress that
children experience,
both in terms of the pressures
of living in the modern world,
but also the pressure of having
to achieve, to score points,
tick boxes, pass exams, all with
the aim of eventually getting
a good job, but in the
opinion of many people,
coming far too early
in their lives.
At Sloka's kindergarten
in Hyderabad,
the emphasis is on a very
simple and rhythmic routine
of creative play and stories,
or simply having time
to watch and wonder.
>> As little children, they
cannot differentiate between
play and work.
For adults, we know that there's
a play time and a work time.
But children, play
is as important,
because it's all imitation.
They imitate whatever they see.
And actually, if
I'm cutting fruit,
they could be cutting
an imaginary fruit.
But they're actually doing it.
It would look as play for us,
but for them it's real work.
>> What Steiner emphasized when
he founded the first Waldorf
School in 1919 in Stuttgart
was that childhood has distinct
phases, and the children not
only have to grow up and learn
the ways of the world, but also
need time and space so that
what each one brings into the
world can unfold harmoniously.
Trailing clouds of glory
is how Wordsworth expressed
it, though some of the
baggage we carry on our backs,
maybe from past lives, is
often far from glorious.
>> (SINGING)
>> Simple and unhurried--
it is this atmosphere
that is attracting
more and more parents
to Waldorf kindergartens
all over the world.
Here in upstate New York in
the Hawthorne Valley Waldorf
School, I came across
this growing awareness
that if childhood is eroded,
we are diminished as adults.
>> There's a story, I think
it's from Zorba the Greek,
about him holding a butterfly
that's just come out
of a cocoon and
wanting to see it fly.
So he tries to blow
on the wings to dry
the wings before their
time, before they're
really strengthened and ready,
and the butterfly ends up
crumbling and unable
to really fly.
And it's time was
not yet come for it.
So we're giving children time.
>> Rudolf Steiner
never visited America,
but he did travel extensively in
Europe during the last 20 years
or so of his life, delivering
over 6,000 lectures,
as well as writing books, plays,
and a collection of meditative
verses.
Walter Kugler is in charge
of the archive related
to Steiner's work up
until his death in 1925.
It's housed in the
basement of this building,
across the meadow from the
Goetheanum in Switzerland,
the center of the
Anthroposophical Society
that Steiner founded.
It replaced an earlier
wooden building
which Steiner
designed and worked on
with an international group of
helpers for nearly eight years,
and which was destroyed by
fire on New Year's Eve in 1922.
Steiner drew up plans
for the replacement,
this time made not out
of wood but of concrete.
But he never lived to
see its completion.
In the following years he
traveled all over Europe,
lecturing and writing on
esoteric subjects such as karma
and reincarnation
and cosmic evolution,
as well as planting seeds,
practical indications
for renewal in all areas of
human life, including the arts.
But Steiner was
not only occupied
with sharing his increasingly
profound spiritual experiences
and with the creation of new
architectural and sculptural
forms inspiring artists such
as Kandinsky and Joseph Beuys.
[BELL RINGING]
Despite problems
with his health,
he continued to travel, here on
a visit to North Wales in 1923.
By now he was becoming deeply
concerned about the situation
emerging in the aftermath
of the First World War,
politically, socially,
and economically.
>> He feels that humanity
is in a great battle,
and he's trying to help, really
trying to save evolution from
the dead end.
>> Or one-sidedness.
>> One-sidedness is a dead end.
If it's unbalanced, it
will break, it will crash,
and it will bring
terrible suffering.
Well, see, Steiner feels
we have already been
through terrible suffering.
There is terrible suffering
in the world-- cruelty.
People starving--
that's an unbalance.
So he was very
interested in economics
and in the proper way for a
government and a community
to form in order to
really to save people
from starvation, and also
from meaningless work--
great concern.
He's not a Marxist, but
he drank from that cup.
He knew Marx's
critique of capitalism
has some profound truth to it.
It's a cruel system.
Totalitarianism is also cruel.
We haven't found
an uncruel system,
but that's what he
was looking for,
where the economic,
the political, and then
the whole cultural sphere
would work collaboratively
in their respective
spheres without anyone
taking over the other.
But in the West,
but particularly
in the United States,
the economic, of course,
is just far more powerful
than the other spheres,
controlling education,
even religion.
For him this is a great concern.
>> Economics points to banking.
And the concern expressed by
Steiner nearly 100 years ago,
and echoed by Robert McDermott,
that the economic sphere
has got too big for its
boots, has increasingly
become the concern of many.
Here in London at the
client day of the UK branch
of the Dutch-based Triodos Bank
are both customers and bankers
who are trying to work in a
different way with money--
greater transparency,
greater responsibility,
and greater consciousness
of how the money deposited
is actually used.
Peter Blom is chairman
of the executive board
of Triodos Bank.
>> I'm convinced that banks
should look more and what is
really needed in society,
and then make out of that
a feasible business.
And that you need some
profit, of course,
you cannot do without profit.
But you don't start with profit.
Profit is the
result. And I think
that was also something
that relates strongly
to what Steiner always said.
Profit is not something
you aim for, profit
is something that is a sign
of a healthy operation.
It's emerging from
healthy transaction.
And that is a much better
way of looking at profit
than putting it there as
a goal, as an objective,
and make everything
work for that goal.
With Steiner, he always
had the human being
in the back of his mind when
he was talking about economics,
about medicine, or whatever.
And that is an important
element that we can learn about.
Because most of
the thinking now,
we exclude the human being.
It's about a system,
and the human beings
who fit into the system.
And what he did
was saying, well,
let's take each human
being as a starting point.
Let's design
something around it,
what can work to
serve human beings.
And that deeper principle,
I think, is quite important.
And you cannot achieve that by
just copying what he has said,
or just repeat what he has said.
I think that's the challenge,
maybe not so much for him,
but for us to work with
what he has brought to us.
>> What Steiner brought
was frequently in response
to questions and to
requests from individuals
or professional groups--
teachers, farmers, priests,
artists, and doctors.
In April 1921, he gave a
three-week lecture course
for a group of medical
practitioners in Dornach,
his base in Switzerland,
during which he
gave the first detailed
and systematic introduction
to anthroposophic medicine,
and also spoke about mistletoe
as a remedy for cancer.
The essence of all
such gatherings
was the quest for a deeper
understanding of the human
being, without
which, said Steiner,
it has actually become
impossible to investigate
the true nature of
health and disease.
Steiner worked closely with
the Dutch doctor Ita Wegman
in bringing his insights
about health and disease
into practical application.
And already back in 1912,
together with his second wife,
Marie von Sievers, and in
connection with the mystery
plays he was
writing, Steiner had
brought into being a new art
of movement, both as a therapy
and as an art form,
that he called eurythmy.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Bravo!
>> We are working with speech,
and we are working with music,
but in such a way that we try
to be music and be speech.
Being music is more
understandable,
because you have ballet--
they work with music.
But they don't really
go into the laws,
if you can say
that, of the music,
the different
elements of the music.
But in tone eurythmy, you go
into all the elements of music,
and you become them.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Steiner calls
it visible song.
So that what is singing,
what you hear in the music,
that is what we are
trying to express.
And with speech, the same thing.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> So the movements
are very precise.
You're not ad-libbing them.
>> No, not at all.
They are really born out
of the elements of music.
>> And speech.
>> And speech, too.
You have the vowels.
You have the consonants.
What we usually
use when we speak,
and we don't think about
it, that it's possible
also to express through
movements this speech.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Margarethe Solstad leads
the eurythmy ensemble based
at the Goetheanum
in Switzerland,
the center of the now worldwide
Anthroposophical Society.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Eurythmy may not on
its own save the world.
And the shape of the Goetheanum
may not be to everyone's taste.
They are, however,
attempts by Steiner
to waken people's
awareness to what
is seemingly hidden behind
the world of appearances.
Eurythmy explores
this other dimension
in both music and speech.
And for Steiner, it was not
a case of spirit or matter,
heaven or earth, but
rather spirit and matter.
There is only one world,
but it is infinitely
more complex and
many-layered than a purely
materialistic mindset is
willing to acknowledge.
Over many years
through a combination
of diligent meditation
and an open heart,
Steiner developed the
natural clairvoyance
he was born with into a faculty
that made possible what he
called spiritual science,
a way of seeing open to us
all that goes beyond
our sense impressions
and a narrowly
focused intellect.
To help awaken the
spiritual in the human being
to the spiritual
in the universe is
how he once described his task.
In other words, the human
being is potentially,
as the ancients taught, a
microcosm of the macrocosm.
Steiner was no longer
silent, no longer alone,
but he paid the price.
He had stuck his head
above the parapet,
and was shot at from
many directions.
In the 10 or so years to come,
until his premature death
in 1925 at the age of
64, there were indeed
triumphs, but also tragedies.
Yet despite exhaustion
and illness,
Steiner continued in
his efforts to remind us
of our evolutionary potential,
and that we are not alone
in the universe--
indeed, that we are made in
the image and likeness of God.
Some listened, some not.
Herein lay the challenge,
both for him and now for us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]